Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this case you're going to have a closer look at normals in blender in front of us.
We have this cube with the top chopped off and I cannot tell you which way these face normals are facing.
Just by having a look at this particular object it doesn't even help us if we switch over into different
rendering modes it still renders as we would expect it to.
So how do we find out which way a face is facing.
Well let's find out more and hop on over in splendor.
Hello everybody and welcome back.
So now that we're over in the default blend scene the first thing I want to show you is the overlays
dropdown.
So we go to the top of the 3D view we see there's an option for overlays.
There's also a toggle right next to it to turn everything off which can give you a nice clean the parents
if you're trying to work on your models or if you're just sharing their current state really quickly
with a screenshot.
Now I'm going to turn those back on.
Otherwise we won't be able to see what's going on.
I'm going to go to my overlays dropdown and we see at the bottom there's an option here for face orientation.
Sounds quite cool sounds very useful as well.
Let's turn it on.
OK.
It's gone blue now.
This stage of course we don't know what blue actually means now because the default cube we can assume
it means outwards.
But in order to test that out we're going to have to be in edit mode.
So let's go ahead.
Press tab whilst the cube is selected and then when we go to the overlays dropdown it contains a lot
more information.
Now do feel free to play with these other areas.
Now scroll wheel goes the opposite way to what you'd expect it to.
There we go.
It's jumped down and towards the bottom.
We have normals and we've got three selections plus size.
We're interested in face normals.
And if we turn the size up we can see that the blue lines are going outwards.
That's good.
That means we go outward facing normal.
That's exactly what we want.
And also what we would expect from the default cube we wouldn't expect it to be the wrong way round.
Now what color does this turn.
If it is the wrong way round Well one of the quick ways we can do that one of the things that is very
easy to do especially if you're in edit mode because it doesn't do in object mode is if we scale something
and accidentally push it inside itself.
Now it looks like the Normals are still facing outwards here but they're not they're actually going
from the inside of the cube from the other side of it all the way through if I make the cube large enough
you'll see that those will disappear.
That means we've got inward facing normals.
Now you may think well what's the issue because you probably have noticed by now that even if you have
done that if we go into shaded mode let's turn off base orientation the cube still looks like the Cube
in every other mode.
It still does look like a cube.
All we have done is it changes with the face orientation.
Well fortunately it looked Dev mode and shading mode.
If we go across to the shading dropdown there's an option called back face culling.
I believe it's also there in the shading mode.
Yes.
Hi guys.
Mark Akers backflips culling has actually been moved and changed.
It's still here under the solid mode.
You still get the blackface coming here but if you try and find it under the viewport shading mode or
the full rendered view it's not here to access that in those notes that you can get view that you get.
Here you go into the it's going to look death mode and it's down here on the material properties panel
and you click it on here and again that would be the same if you wanted it in the rendered view without
mind.
Back to Mike.
This is what the cube would look like if you were to take it into a game engine or some other programs.
It would get confused and it will only render the face with the normal coming out of it an outward facing
normal.
Now if you do happen to have a cube or any other object like this we have a couple of options for correcting
that normal.
The first one is to make normals consistent.
So I'm going to tap back into edit mode make sure everything is selected and go shift in n.
Doing that will make normals consistent.
And if I open up the operator panel we can see we have two options outside and inside.
Sometimes that doesn't work.
However sometimes you will have to select the face manually and with that face selected go to the mesh
menu go to your normals.
And in this case I'm going to have to scroll up a little and we can flip the normals the shift in the
recalculate outside won't work all the time in which case we can flip an individual normal.
So it's facing the other way.
And because we still got black face coming turned on it has disappeared into the model and we won't
see it.
So if I go ahead and just deletes that face we've got a bucket and we can see here it looks transparent
even though in Blender without black face culling turned on it looks pretty solid.
So unfortunately you cannot just export an object like this and expect it to work.
Now this could be a glorified flower pots what would happen inside a game engine or some other programs.
Is it all just look see through which is absolutely no good.
And we can test that live.
I can go here and export it to the GLC f format.
I'm not going to do any other options here but I'm just going to save this.
And then on the right hand side click GLC F two points.
Oh it may take a few seconds the first time round that you do this but then it will export and if you
have Windows 10.
And here we go.
If you've got Windows 10 you can open up your testing normals file which is pretty cool and we see we've
got the same issue is invisible from other sides from inside.
So this is something that you'll have to work on and get used to when you're working with Blender and
other programs as well.
If we wanted to make this look like a box that you could look into.
You could either enable double sided faces if it exists as an option in the other program or you will
have to make sure that your object is genuinely 3D and there are loads of other options that will cover
as we go through.
But this is just something to bear in mind.
And another option to show you as it is one that commonly people get caught out with.
So in summary we have our overlays our face orientation whilst we're in edit mode.
We can change and see face normals if we scroll down on the overlays option we can turn on face normals
and look at their size and with this orientation it's very difficult to see them but there they are
and both in Look Dev mode and solid shaded mode rendering mode under the shading option there's an option
for black face culling if you turn on any faces that would appear transparent in other programs will
go transparent.
So it's a good way of catching normals that have been accidentally flipped especially when you're editing
scaling and moving things around.
And with that in mind comes your challenge Okay so your challenge is to open up the lecture resources.
I'll show you where is in the moment.
If you're not sure download the normal mass zip file extract and open up the normal mass blend file
and then once you've done that I'd like you to go ahead and fix any inward facing normals.
And while still there do you notice anything odd about the interface when you open up that particular
blend file.
Think about it and if you want to you can correct it if not you can just accept how it is on that particular
file and if you're wondering lecture resources are up in the top left click on resources available and
you'll be able to navigate to those resources.
So go ahead pause video now and give us a go Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and fix these inward facing normals over in Blender.
OK.
So let's do this challenge.
I've already downloaded normal mass I'm going to drag it into blender and select open.
OK.
So with this file open one of the first things that you may spot is that the layout is ever so slightly
different.
So what is going on here.
Well if we have a look.
The header bar is now at the bottom.
Now the reason why I'm giving you the file like this is to show you that your file remembers where you
put things.
It doesn't just go back to its default layout.
So if you have saved your files especially earlier blender files if you're bringing them in it's just
a reminder here that if the header bar was on the bottom before when you open it back up the header
bar will still be at the bottom.
Now to be consistent with the rest of the course what I'm going to make sure I do here is just right
click and flip it to the top.
And there we go.
It looks exactly the same as it did before.
So there are a couple of ways that we could go about doing this.
Now in order to edit the normals that are wrong we're going to have to be an edit mode.
But to make sure that I know what's going on I'm going to go to overlays and turn on face orientation
and boom straight away.
We can see that the whole bottom face here in several squares are facing the wrong direction.
So we don't really need to do anything else there but you could also with Edit Mode Selector gone in
and gone all the way down until we've got the option of normals turn on face normals and turn their
signs up and it's very quick and easy to see which ones are facing the wrong way.
And finally of course we could be in Look Dev mode and make sure blackface Cummings turned on and they
really do stand out at that point I want to turn back to solid shade and blackface Cowlings at the top
as we can see there.
And then of course I've got one of two options I can select faces individually if I wanted to but in
this case in the press the A key to select all shift in N and hopefully all of the normals will now
be pointing outwards.
Brilliant.
So there we go we've covered normals in actually quite a bit of detail right down at the fundamentals
of how they handled in Blender.
Now this may have seemed quite simple but later on in the course and during your time with Blender you're
going to end up with some inverted normals and whether it's with modifiers whether it's with the particle
system or if you're exporting it to a game engine if you don't watch out for inverted normals it can
cause you a headache especially if you're working in the team and you hand across something that ends
up being invisible inside a game engine which is very easy to do.
So this can be one of the final things you check before doing an export or just be aware of it as you
go along and catch it before it's a problem.
So that's it for this lecture and I'll see you guys in the next one.